---
layout: page
title: Call for Papers
permalink: /cfp/
---

[(in deutscher Sprache)](#de)

# Conference on Fashion and Images

## Signs and Symbols -

## Dress at the Intersection between Image and Realia

**Berlin, February 18-20, 2016**

**Cluster of Excellence “Image Knowledge Gestaltung. An Interdisciplinary Laboratory”**

**Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin**

Dress research is a relatively young academic discipline and its methods are dynamic, drawing from the fields of visual
studies, linguistics, and cultural studies, and alternating between detailed empirical analysis of material culture and
its interpretation. Fashion in images (painting, printmaking, photography, sculpture) and in written works are typically
considered through the lens of art history and historical analysis, whereas the research on textiles and clothing tends
to favor technology-based methods of investigation. Yet not infrequently, it appears that the various specialized
interests are generating independent strands of research—leaving untapped the potential to create synergies and to
synthesize diverse research approaches. Seeking ways to address this desideratum will be one key aim of the planned
conference. “Cross-reading,” the juxtaposition of different source texts, requires particular meticulousness and a
thorough knowledge of the different research disciplines. Common to all the disciplines engaged in dress research is the
question of how to define and delineate the image-dress-fashion triad. In the framework of this multidisciplinary
conference, we want to bring about a reflection on applied methods and, with it, a collective self-positioning of the
disciplines with regard to dress.

The overarching aim of the conference is to create synergies in the research on visual objects, dress, and accessories
by bringing together scholars from a range of disciplines in the humanities and empirical sciences whose research
engages themes of dress and fashion. The focus of discussion will be on methodical and methodological questions
surrounding the reconstruction of dress and its significance in visual and textual media.

## 1. Relation between image and written word

The following areas of emphasis and the questions they present all relate to two sides of the same coin: dress as
textile artefact and dress in images. Between these poles, dress functions as (body) image, both in real life and in
visual representations. Research on the repertoire of sartorial symbolism relies on both visual and textual sources.
What do these sources say about patterns of identification, ranging from distinction to conformity, within the context
of normative behavioral codes? And how do they affect the symbolic meaning of dress from the following perspectives?

- a) Norm and form: Clothing regulations, ceremonial records, and police regulations show that ruling authorities’ efforts
to enforce social norms required the development of ever more, and increasingly differentiated regulations and
penalties—not only in the area of clothing regulations and sumptuary laws but also for the governance of society as a
whole. Taking this legal history perspective as a point of departure, the conference will focus on the causes and
impacts of clothing regulations.

- b) Cultural transfer: Clothing and fashion were important trade commodities, which were also absorbed into the clothing
styles of other courtly societies, although not without reinterpretation. Dress and fashion transfer unfolded on a
spectrum ranging from conformity by means of assimilation to the establishment of distinction by means of adaptation.
More concretely: What formal and semantic changes did the Parisian fashion of absolutism go through in neighboring
countries? How were the costumes of Dutch regents of the 17th century adapted as they were incorporated into the dress
of neighboring countries, and what elements of late 18th century English fashion were adopted?

- c) Hybrid dress: Special attention will be paid to the designers of hybrid dress, who conceived decidedly inauthentic
vestments in early modern painting and sculpture. Anthonis van Dyck’s portraits, for instance, depict women in fanciful
garments that are not adequately understood to this day, and the inauthentic costumes depicted by artists from Donatello
to Schlüter in equestrian statues and busts of rulers led ultimately to the academic “costume dispute.”

- d) Caricature: The exaggerated forms of fashion found in caricature as a genre are semantically loaded, shifting between
nationalisms, social critique, and gender problems. The conference will therefore explore on a fundamental level whether
the art historical approach of iconographic-iconological analysis of visual motifs can do justice to the motif of dress
and its cultural meanings or to the reconstruction of a “material culture.”

The planned conference will take up the critique of logocentric iconology to explore a hermeneutic approach to the
representation of things based on visual representations of dress. It will use these depictions as a means of examining
whether the meaning of objects in images can be deduced solely from their established textual and programmatic meanings.
Although certain objects were not the subject of scholarly humanistic or theological discourse in the early modern
period, these objects can still claim symbolic meaning. Whether south or north of the Alps, the symbolic meanings of
objects, and particularly dress, can be understood within the context of the visual world they inhabit. The realities
they generate may be temporally antecedent to textual reflection. In this context, a focus of the conference will be on
re-reading textual sources that have been understood in the fashion research up to now based on established patterns of
interpretation that are in urgent need of revision. These include non-descriptive sources, beyond ceremonial literature
and the systematic evaluation thereof, such as court records, wills, and inventories.

## 2.  Empirical Research

The empirically oriented research, which focuses on surviving historical objects such as textiles, clothing ensembles,
accessories, and paintings, is conducted by experts in material science and art restoration. Their work involves
collecting data on historical textiles, paintings, and other artefacts, and studying the structure and construction of
objects or analyzing paint layers, color values, and the percentages of metals in pigments. Reading this information
requires in-depth, specialized knowledge of the discipline in question, whereas interpreting and applying the findings
to a larger context requires an interdisciplinary approach. At precisely these two junctures, frictions sometimes arise.
In interdisciplinary research teams, it is not uncommon to see that findings reported by empirical researchers first
have be translated into non-specialist language and then placed within the context of research questions in the
humanities. And while this can cause frictions, it can also lead to joint research questions. 

Surviving historical objects are of central importance for any reconstruction and interpretation of dress and
vestimentary cultures. Focusing on the interface of picture, text, and object sources, the conference will explore
methodological options that might be utilized more fully to promote transdisciplinary research, and will encourage
researchers to challenge and stretch the established methodological boundaries of their respective disciplines. This
will require a willingness on the part of researchers to engage in deconstructing their own narratives, established
theories, and historical models. This applies, for instance, to the fashion theory of Georg Simmel (1906), which
occupies a central place in fashion studies to this day and is undoubtedly just as relevant as it is in urgent need of
revision. Probing such sensitive methodological points will mean drawing connections between visual and textual sources
and objects, and comparing and interpreting them. In the second part of the conference, (restoration) reports from
collections will form the nucleus of a search for methodological orientation. A further aim of the conference will be to
supplement this search with reports from archaeological excavations, which have been the source of an increasing number
of vestimentary finds in recent years.

## 3. Concepts / Terminology

Between ethnology and cultural studies, broader questions of nomenclature arise, as the existing concepts—including
fashion, dress, traditional costume, and costume—are inconsistent in their definitions and interpretations. The concept
of fashion, for example, has gained prominence in scholarly work in recent years. It is based on Simmel’s theory of
fashion (distinction and adaptation) and is applied in historical research uniformly to all the centuries of early
modern history. Equally in need of revision are the terms “traditional costume” and “costume,” whose semantic
orientations have been revised inconsistently in the scholarship over the last few decades. These terms require critical
reassessment. In this terrain of methodological uncertainties, it is important to bring together various sources (visual
and textual material) and objects/artefacts (dress, accessories) and to find ways of analyzing and interpreting them.

**We invite scholars in art history, visual culture, fashion, history, cultural studies, archaeology, sociology, and
experts in textiles research and conservation, as well as literary scholars, anthropologists, legal scholars, and
economists to present their diverse perspectives on the development and significance of fashion and dress at the
conference.**

### Call for Abstracts:

Please submit your proposal of ca. 3.000 characters as well as contact details by June 15, 2015.
Languages of the conference are: German and English.

### Concept and Organization:

Prof. Dr. Philipp Zitzlsperger, Sabine de Günther M.A.

### Contact

Cluster of Excellence »_Image Knowledge Gestaltung_. An interdisciplinary Laboratory«Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin,
Sophienstrasse 22a, 10178 Berlin

[www.interdisciplinary-laboratory.hu-berlin.de](http://www.interdisciplinary-laboratory.hu-berlin.de)

E-Mail: bwg.zeichen-und-symbole@hu-berlin.de

----

# <a name="de" />Mode- und bildwissenschaftliche Tagung

## Zeichen und Symbole -

## Kleidung zwischen Bild und Realie

**Berlin, 18.02.–20.02.2016**

**Exzellenzcluster »_Bild Wissen Gestaltung_. Ein Interdisziplinäres Labor«**

**Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin**

Die vestimentären Wissenschaften sind relativ jung und ihre Methoden oszillieren zwischen den Disziplinen der Bild-,
Sprach- und Kulturwissenschaft bzw. den empirisch-materialkundlichen Analysen und deren Deutungen. Während Mode in Bild
(Malerei, Grafik, Fotografie, Skulptur) und Schrift meist vor dem Hintergrund der Kunst- und Geschichtswissenschaften
betrachtet werden, konzentrieren sich die Forschungen am Textil oder Kleiderensemble dagegen auf den Umgang mit
technologischen Untersuchungsmethoden. Nicht selten ist festzustellen, dass die unterschiedlichen Erkenntnisinteressen
autonome Forschung generieren, Synergien und Synthesebildung jedoch bisweilen auf der Strecke bleiben. Das
»Cross-Reading«, das Verzahnen der Quellenlektüre etwa bedarf einer besonderen Gründlichkeit und unterschiedlicher
disziplinärer Kenntnisse, die es zu diskutieren gilt. Allen Disziplinen gemeinsam stellt sich die Frage nach der
Eingrenzung und Definition der Trias von Bild-Kleidung-Mode. Wir möchten im Rahmen einer multidisziplinär aufgestellten
Tagung die Reflektion der angewandten Methoden und damit eine Selbstverortung der Disziplinen forcieren.

Die Tagung macht sich zur Aufgabe, Synergien von Bild-, Kleider- und Accessoireforschung zu gewinnen, indem
Wissenschaftler_innen, für die Bekleidung und Mode in ihren Forschungsobjekten thematisch Relevanz hat, aus den
verschiedenen Disziplinen der Geisteswissenschaften und empirischen Wissenschaften zusammenkommen. Im Zentrum der
Debatte stehen methodische und methodologische Fragestellungen, die sich mit der Rekonstruktion von Kleidung und ihrer
medialen Bedeutung befassen.

## 1. Verhältnis von Schrift und Bild

Folgende Schwerpunktsetzungen und Fragestellungen betreffen stets beide Seiten einer Medaille, nämlich die Kleidung als
Realie und die Kleidung im Bild. Zwischen diesen Polen wirkt Kleidung als (Körper-)Bild in der Lebenswirklichkeit und im
Bild. Um den vestimentären Symbolhaushalt auszuloten, ist die Wissenschaft auf Bild- und Schriftquellen angewiesen.
Welche Aussagekraft haben sie in Bezug auf Identifikationsmuster zwischen Distinktion und Anpassung im Rahmen normativer
Verhaltenscodices? Und wie wirken sie sich auf die symbolische Bedeutung der Kleidung aus hinsichtlich verschiedener
Gesichtspunkte:

- a) Norm und Form: Kleidervorschriften, Zeremonialbücher und Polizeiordnungen weisen darauf hin, dass das obrigkeitliche
Streben nach Normdurchsetzung eine Zunahme und Ausdifferenzierung der Verordnungen und Strafen voraussetzte, die nicht
nur die Kleider- und Luxusgesetze betraf, sondern die gesamte Steuerung der Gesellschaft. Unter diesen
rechtshistorischen Vorzeichen interessieren Ursache und Wirkung der Kleiderverordnungen.
- b) Kulturtransfer: Kleidung bzw. Mode waren wichtige Handelsgüter, die in den Kleiderstil anderer höfischer
Gesellschaften aufgenommen und dort umgedeutet wurden. Kleider- und Modetransfer entfaltete sich zwischen Anpassung
durch Assimilation und Distinktion durch Anverwandlung. Konkret gesprochen: Welche formalen und semantischen
Veränderungen erfuhr die Pariser Mode des Absolutismus in den Nachbarländern, wie wurde das holländische Regenten-Kostüm
im 17. Jahrhundert in den angrenzenden Ländern adaptiert oder welche Elemente der englischen Mode aus der zweiten
Hälfte des 18. Jahrhunderts fanden Anwendung?
- c) Hybridkleidung: Es gilt, erhöhte Aufmerksamkeit den Bildgestaltern von Hybridkleidung zu widmen, die in vormoderner
Malerei und Skulptur dezidiert unauthentische Vestimente arrangierten. In Antonis van Dycks Porträts etwa tragen Frauen
bis heute missverstandene Fantasiegewänder und in den Reiterstandbildern und Herrscherbüsten von Donatello bis Schlüter
wagten die Künstler unauthentische Kostümarrangements, die schließlich in den akademischen »Kostümstreit« mündeten. 
- d) Karikatur: Semantisch aufgeladen sind die überzeichnenden Modeformen in der Gattung der Karikatur, die zwischen
Nationalismen, Gesellschaftskritik und Genderproblem oszillieren. Zu erörtern wäre also grundsätzlich, ob der
kunsthistorische Ansatz der ikonographisch-ikonologischen Analyse des Bildmotivs dem Kleidermotiv und seiner kulturellen
Bedeutung bzw. der Rekonstruktion einer »Materiellen Kultur« gerecht werden kann.

Auf der geplanten Tagung soll die Kritik an einer logozentristischen Ikonologie aufgegriffen und ein hermeneutischer
Zugang zu Dingdarstellungen erprobt werden, um an der Darstellung von Kleidung zu überprüfen, ob sich die Bedeutung von
Dingen in Bildern nicht allein über textliche und programmatische Fixierung erschließt. Auch wenn in der Frühneuzeit
bestimmte Dinge nicht Gegenstand humanistisch gelehrter oder theologischer Diskurse waren, können sie dennoch
symbolische Sinnstiftung beanspruchen. Gleichgültig ob südlich oder nördlich der Alpen – die symbolische Bedeutung der
Dinge, insbesondere der Kleidung, kann sich in ihrer Bildwelt selbst erschließen und Wirklichkeiten generieren, die
einer textlichen Reflexion evtl. zeitlich voraus sind. In diesem Zusammenhang interessiert die Re-Lektüre von
Schriftquellen, die in der vestimentären Forschung bislang eingefahrenen Deutungsmustern unterliegen, die neu zu
justieren sind. Hierzu zählen vor allem nicht beschreibende, über Zeremonialliteratur hinausgehende Quellen und ihre
systematische Auswertung beispielsweise von Gerichtsakten, Testamenten oder Inventaren.

## 2. Empirische Forschung

Die empirisch ausgerichtete Forschung, welche überlieferte Objekte, so etwa Textilien, Kleiderensembles, Accessoires
oder Gemälde, untersucht, wird durch die Materialforscher und Restaurierungswissenschaftler vertreten. Diese erheben
Daten zu den überlieferten Textilien, Gemälden oder anderen Artefakten. Untersuchungen betreffen Aufbau und Konstruktion
oder die Analyse von Malschichten, Farbwerten und Metallanteilen in Pigmenten. Das Lesen dieser Informationen bedarf
einer dezidiert disziplinären Fachkenntnis, ihre Interpretation und Bezugnahme auf einen übergreifenden Kontext jedoch
bedarf eines interdisziplinären Ansatzes. Doch genau an diesen Schnittstellen entstehen bisweilen Reibungsverluste. Denn
in interdisziplinär ausgerichteten Forschungsverbünden ist zu beobachten, dass von den empirischen Wissenschaften
formulierte Aussagen zunächst übersetzt und in den Kontext geisteswissenschaftlicher Forschungsfragen gesetzt werden
müssen. Daraus können sich gemeinsame Forschungsfragen ergeben. 

Für jede Rekonstruktion und Deutung der Kleidung und ihrer vestimentären Kulturen sind die überlieferten Objekte von
zentraler Bedeutung. Die Tagung will vor allem an der Schnittstelle zwischen Bild-, Schrift- und Objektquellen arbeiten
und methodische Optionen ausloten, die bisweilen noch gestärkt werden können im Sinne einer transdisziplinären
Forschung, für die Wissenschaftler etablierte Methoden ihrer jeweils spezifischen Disziplinen hinterfragen und weiter
entwickeln. Hierzu zählt auch die Bereitschaft zur Dekonstruktion eigener Narrative und eingefahrener Theorien und
Geschichtsbilder, etwa der bis heute im Zentrum der vestimentären Wissenschaften stehende Modetheorie Georg Simmels
(1906). Diese ist zweifellos ebenso relevant wie korrekturbedürftig. Den Finger in die methodische Wunde legen bedeutet,
Bild-, Schriftquellen und Objekte in Bezug zu setzen, abzugleichen und zu deuten. (Restaurierungs-)Berichte aus den
Sammlungsbeständen sollen für den zweiten Teil der Tagung den Nucleus methodischer Orientierungssuche bilden. Sie zu
ergänzen durch archäologische Grabungsberichte, welche die zunehmende Zahl von vestimentären Funden in jüngster Zeit
betreffen, ist Ziel der Tagung.

## 3. Begriffsbildung / Terminologie

Zwischen Ethnologie und Kulturwissenschaften stellt sich übergreifend die Frage einer Nomenklatur, deren Begriffe wie
Mode, Bekleidung, Tracht und Kostüm zu uneinheitlichen Definitionen und Deutungen führen. Der Modebegriff beispielsweise
hat in der wissenschaftlichen Publizistik umfassenden Raum gewonnen, indem er auf Simmels Modetheorie (Distinktion und
Anpassung) fußt und in den historischen Wissenschaften auf alle Jahrhunderte der Vormoderne einheitlich angewendet wird.
Ebenso revisionsbedürftig sind die Termini »Tracht« oder »Kostüm«, deren semantische Ausrichtung in den letzten Dekaden
in der Wissenschaft uneinheitliche Neujustierungen erfuhr, die einer kritischen Bestandsaufnahme bedürfen. Auf diesem
Terrain der methodischen Unsicherheiten gilt es, Quellen (Bild- und Schriftquellen) und Objekte/Artefakte (Kleidung,
Accessoires) zusammen zu führen und Wege ihrer Analyse und Deutung zu finden

**Eingeladen sind Kunst- und Bildwissenschaftler, Modewissenschaftler, Historiker, Kulturwissenschaftler, Archäologen,
Soziologen, Textilforscher und -restauratoren ebenso wie Literaturwissenschaftler, Anthropologen, Juristen und
Wirtschaftswissenschaftler, ihren Blick auf die Entwicklung und Bedeutung von Mode und Bekleidung vorzustellen.**

### Call for Abstracts
Bitte reichen Sie bis zum 15. Juni 2015 eine aussagekräftige Zusammenfassung (Abstract) Ihres Beitrags ein (Umfang:
maximal 3.000 Zeichen).

### Konzept und Organisation:

Prof. Dr. Philipp Zitzlsperger, Sabine de Günther M.A.

### Kontakt:

Exzellenzcluster »_Bild Wissen Gestaltung_. Ein interdisziplinäres Labor« Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Sophienstrasse
22a, 10178 Berlin.

[www.interdisciplinary-laboratory.hu-berlin.de](http://www.interdisciplinary-laboratory.hu-berlin.de)

E-Mail: bwg.zeichen-und-symbole@hu-berlin.de
